README.md, before:

# Agentic Development Process

A battle-tested framework for managing multi-phase software development with AI coding agents.

## Why This Exists

When building complex software with AI agents, the biggest challenge isn't the AI's capability—it's **context continuity**. Agents lose memory between sessions, leading to:

- Repeated work and wasted context
- Inconsistent quality across phases
- Broken integrations between components
- Lost knowledge when resuming projects

This guide solves that with a comprehensive orchestration pattern.

## Industry Validation

This process was developed independently in **October 2025** through real-world production development. In **November 2025**, Anthropic published ["Effective Harnesses for Long-Running Agents"](https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/effective-harnesses-for-long-running-agents) describing remarkably similar patterns:

| Pattern | This Guide | Anthropic Blog |
|---------|-----------|----------------|
| File-based state persistence | `docs/PROGRESS.md` + `.phase-status/` | `claude-progress.txt` |
| Git as source of truth | Detailed merge workflow | Git logs + commits |
| Incremental progress | 5-10 tasks per phase | One feature per session |
| Session initialization | 5-minute context recovery | Structured startup protocol |
| Testing before completion | 10-step mandatory workflow | End-to-end verification |

**This convergence validates these patterns as industry best practices.** This guide provides the comprehensive operational playbook that complements Anthropic's conceptual framework.

## What's Different Here

While Anthropic's blog covers the "what," this guide covers the "how" in exhaustive detail:

- **Master Orchestrator Pattern** - Coordinate multiple agents working in parallel (not just sequential handoffs)
- **Git Worktrees** - True parallel development across phases
- **Quality Gates** - 10 mandatory checkpoints before any merge
- **Code Review Process** - Scoring system and review templates
- **Agent Guardrails** - Explicit prohibitions to prevent context-pressure shortcuts
- **File-Based Communication** - Bidirectional protocol between master and subagents

## Quick Start

### 1. Set Up Your Project

```bash
# Create coordination structure
mkdir -p .coordination/status-reports .coordination/archives docs

# Create core files
touch docs/PROGRESS.md
touch .coordination/SUBAGENT-GUIDELINES.md
touch .coordination/COMMIT-WORKFLOW.md

# Copy templates from templates/ directory
```

### 2. Create Phase Worktrees

```bash
# Create a worktree for Phase 1
git worktree add ../project-phase-1 -b feature/phase-1-foundation

# Set up communication
mkdir -p ../project-phase-1/.phase-status
```

### 3. Launch Subagent

Open a new AI agent session in the phase worktree with clear instructions:

```
This is Phase 1 at [PATH] on branch feature/phase-1-foundation.

Tasks:
1. [Task 1]
2. [Task 2]

⚠️ CRITICAL: Read .phase-status/MASTER-NOTES.md for testing requirements!
```

### 4. Orchestrate

As master orchestrator:
- Check phase progress every 10-30 minutes
- Provide guidance via MASTER-NOTES.md
- Review and merge when quality gates pass

## Documentation

- **[Full Guide](./AGENTIC-DEVELOPMENT-PROCESS.md)** - Complete operational playbook
- **[Templates](./templates/)** - Ready-to-use templates for all coordination files
- **[Examples](./examples/)** - Sample phase breakdowns for different project types

## Core Concepts

### File-Based Communication

```
Subagent works → Updates PROGRESS.md → Master reads
                                              ↓
User reads ← Master updates dashboard ← Master provides guidance
```

### Quality Gates (All Must Pass)

1. Code complete
2. Build passes (0 errors)
3. Tests created
4. Tests pass (100%)
5. Manual testing done
6. Database verified
7. Integration verified
8. Security checked
9. Documentation created
10. Performance acceptable

### Agent Guardrails

Subagents are explicitly prohibited from:
- Skipping testing
- Merging to develop
- Committing without 100% tests passing
- Making merge decisions

Only the Master Orchestrator merges.

## Results You Can Expect

With this process:
- **Fast development** via parallel worktrees
- **High quality** via mandatory testing + reviews
- **Easy resume** via file-based context
- **Low bugs** via test-before-merge
- **Clear ownership** via one agent per phase
- **Sustainable velocity** via enforced quality gates

## Contributing

Issues and PRs welcome. This is a living document based on real-world usage.

## License

MIT License - Use freely for any project.

---

*This is a battle-tested process for high-quality, high-velocity AI-assisted development.*

Commit message:

docs: add 'How to Use This Document' section to README
Clarifies that AGENTIC-DEVELOPMENT-PROCESS.md is designed to be used as
a system prompt for an AI agent (like Claude Code) to initialize it as
the Master Orchestrator.

Explains the typical workflow and notes that '(You)' in the main doc
addresses the AI agent that will become the Master Orchestrator.

README.md, after:

# Agentic Development Process

A battle-tested framework for managing multi-phase software development with AI coding agents.

## Why This Exists

When building complex software with AI agents, the biggest challenge isn't the AI's capability—it's **context continuity**. Agents lose memory between sessions, leading to:

- Repeated work and wasted context
- Inconsistent quality across phases
- Broken integrations between components
- Lost knowledge when resuming projects

This guide solves that with a comprehensive orchestration pattern.

## Industry Validation

This process was developed independently in **October 2025** through real-world production development. In **November 2025**, Anthropic published ["Effective Harnesses for Long-Running Agents"](https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/effective-harnesses-for-long-running-agents) describing remarkably similar patterns:

| Pattern | This Guide | Anthropic Blog |
|---------|-----------|----------------|
| File-based state persistence | `docs/PROGRESS.md` + `.phase-status/` | `claude-progress.txt` |
| Git as source of truth | Detailed merge workflow | Git logs + commits |
| Incremental progress | 5-10 tasks per phase | One feature per session |
| Session initialization | 5-minute context recovery | Structured startup protocol |
| Testing before completion | 10-step mandatory workflow | End-to-end verification |

**This convergence validates these patterns as industry best practices.** This guide provides the comprehensive operational playbook that complements Anthropic's conceptual framework.

## What's Different Here

While Anthropic's blog covers the "what," this guide covers the "how" in exhaustive detail:

- **Master Orchestrator Pattern** - Coordinate multiple agents working in parallel (not just sequential handoffs)
- **Git Worktrees** - True parallel development across phases
- **Quality Gates** - 10 mandatory checkpoints before any merge
- **Code Review Process** - Scoring system and review templates
- **Agent Guardrails** - Explicit prohibitions to prevent context-pressure shortcuts
- **File-Based Communication** - Bidirectional protocol between master and subagents

## How to Use This Document

The main document (`AGENTIC-DEVELOPMENT-PROCESS.md`) is designed to be used as a **system prompt** for an AI coding agent (like Claude Code) to initialize it as the Master Orchestrator.

**Typical Workflow:**

1. **Initialize Master Agent:** Feed `AGENTIC-DEVELOPMENT-PROCESS.md` + your `prd.md` (Product Requirements Document) to Claude Code
2. **Master Plans Phases:** The AI agent reads your PRD and breaks it into phases using this process
3. **Master Creates Subagent Prompts:** For each phase, the Master prepares prompts for subagents
4. **Subagents Execute:** Each subagent works in its own git worktree following the guidelines
5. **Master Reviews & Merges:** Master coordinates, reviews, and merges completed phases

> **Note:** When you see "(You)" in `AGENTIC-DEVELOPMENT-PROCESS.md`, it addresses the AI agent that will become the Master Orchestrator after reading the prompt.

## Quick Start

### 1. Set Up Your Project

```bash
# Create coordination structure
mkdir -p .coordination/status-reports .coordination/archives docs

# Create core files
touch docs/PROGRESS.md
touch .coordination/SUBAGENT-GUIDELINES.md
touch .coordination/COMMIT-WORKFLOW.md

# Copy templates from templates/ directory
```

### 2. Create Phase Worktrees

```bash
# Create a worktree for Phase 1
git worktree add ../project-phase-1 -b feature/phase-1-foundation

# Set up communication
mkdir -p ../project-phase-1/.phase-status
```

### 3. Launch Subagent

Open a new AI agent session in the phase worktree with clear instructions:

```
This is Phase 1 at [PATH] on branch feature/phase-1-foundation.

Tasks:
1. [Task 1]
2. [Task 2]

⚠️ CRITICAL: Read .phase-status/MASTER-NOTES.md for testing requirements!
```

### 4. Orchestrate

As master orchestrator:
- Check phase progress every 10-30 minutes
- Provide guidance via MASTER-NOTES.md
- Review and merge when quality gates pass

## Documentation

- **[Full Guide](./AGENTIC-DEVELOPMENT-PROCESS.md)** - Complete operational playbook
- **[Templates](./templates/)** - Ready-to-use templates for all coordination files
- **[Examples](./examples/)** - Sample phase breakdowns for different project types

## Core Concepts

### File-Based Communication

```
Subagent works → Updates PROGRESS.md → Master reads
                                              ↓
User reads ← Master updates dashboard ← Master provides guidance
```

### Quality Gates (All Must Pass)

1. Code complete
2. Build passes (0 errors)
3. Tests created
4. Tests pass (100%)
5. Manual testing done
6. Database verified
7. Integration verified
8. Security checked
9. Documentation created
10. Performance acceptable

### Agent Guardrails

Subagents are explicitly prohibited from:
- Skipping testing
- Merging to develop
- Committing without 100% tests passing
- Making merge decisions

Only the Master Orchestrator merges.

## Results You Can Expect

With this process:
- **Fast development** via parallel worktrees
- **High quality** via mandatory testing + reviews
- **Easy resume** via file-based context
- **Low bugs** via test-before-merge
- **Clear ownership** via one agent per phase
- **Sustainable velocity** via enforced quality gates

## Contributing

Issues and PRs welcome. This is a living document based on real-world usage.

## License

MIT License - Use freely for any project.

---

*This is a battle-tested process for high-quality, high-velocity AI-assisted development.*
